1. Problem Description
1.1. Problem Statement:
Develop programs by implementing algorithms MINMAX-A-B and ALPHA-BETA-SEARCH. Use "Connect Four" game to develop and play your programs.
1.2. Description:
Connect four game is a deterministic, two-player, zero-sum, and perfect- information games. A game is deterministic if there is no element of randomness. The next events should be perfectly predictable given the knowledge of the previous game states and the player’s actions. Zero-sum games involve pure competition. A player’s loss is another player’s gain and vice versa. One player tries to maximize one single value, while the other tries to minimize it. A game gives perfect information if each player knows all the events that previously occurred. For example, each player in chess can see all the pieces on the board at all times. The perfect examples of deterministic, two-player, zero-sum, and perfect-information games are chess, checkers, tic- tac-toe, and Go.
This project implements the Connect four game, which is a two-player game using the algorithms MINIMAX-A-B and ALPHA-BETA-SEARCH. Connect four is a two-player game. This project uses AI for playing the game in place of the two players. The AI is implemented by using the algorithms MINIMAX-A-B and ALPHA-BETA-SEARCH and three different evaluation functions. The game at each turn has a lot of possible moves and strategy. The above algorithms are used to avoid checking all the possible moves and strategies and implement the AI in an efficient and accurate manner, so as to reduce the memory and time consumed for the AI to win the game.
2. The Domain
Two player games, Adversarial Search and games, Artificial Intelligence, MINIMAX-A-B and ALPHA-BETA-SEARCH.
3. Methodologies
3.1. MINIMAX-A-B:
Minimax is a decision rule used in artificial intelligence, decision theory, game theory, statistics, and philosophy for minimizing the possible loss for a worst case (maximum loss) scenario. When dealing with gains, it is referred to as "maximin"—to maximize the minimum gain. Originally formulated for n-player zero-sum game theory, covering both the cases where players take alternate moves and those where they make simultaneous moves, it has also been extended to more complex games and to general decision-making in the presence of uncertainty. Alpha–beta pruning is a search algorithm that seeks to decrease the number of nodes that are evaluated by the minimax algorithm in its search tree. It is an adversarial search algorithm used commonly for machine playing of two-player games (Tic-tac-toe, Chess, Connect 4, etc.). It stops evaluating a move when at least one possibility has been found that proves the move to be worse than a previously examined move. Such moves need not be evaluated further. When applied to a standard minimax tree, it returns the same move as minimax would, but prunes away branches that cannot possibly influence the final decision.
3.2. ALPHA-BETA-SEARCH:
The number of game states is exponential in the depth of the tree. No algorithm can completely eliminate the exponent, but we can sometimes cut it in half, computing the correct minimax decision without examining every state by pruning large parts of the tree that make no difference to the outcome. The particular technique we examine is called Alpha–beta pruning alpha–beta pruning. As we have seen in the minimax search algorithm that the number of game states it has to examine are exponential in depth of the tree. Since we cannot eliminate the exponent, but we can cut it to half. Hence there is a technique by which without checking each node of the game tree we can compute the correct minimax decision, and this technique is called pruning. This involves two threshold parameter Alpha and beta for future expansion, so it is called alpha-beta pruning. It is also called as Alpha-Beta Algorithm.
α = the value of the best (i.e., highest-value) choice we have found so far at any choice point along the path for MAX. Think: α = “at least.”
β = the value of the best (i.e., lowest-value) choice we have found so far at any choice point along the path for MIN. Think: β = “at most.”